Data Mining

METHODS: DECISION TREES

BY: IVETA MRÁZOVÁ
METHODS:               Contents:

DECISION               · Motivation and the TDIDT algorithm
TREES
                           · Top Down Induction of Decision Trees
Contents:                  · Example
                           · Important factors
· Motivation and the
    TDIDT algorithm    · ID3 - Algorithm
                       · Other decision tree models
· ID3 - Algorithm
                           · Algorithms C4.5 and C5.0
· Other decision tree      · CART ~ Classification And Regression Trees
    models                 · CHAID ~ CHI-square Automatic Interaction

· Ensemble methods                      Detection

                       · Ensemble methods

                           · Bagging ~ bootstrapped aggregating
                           · Random forests
                           · Boosting and the AdaBoost algorithm

                       I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                           2
METHODS:               Contents:

DECISION               · Motivation and the TDIDT algorithm
TREES
                            · Top Down Induction of Decision Trees
Contents:                   · Example
                            · Important factors
· Motivation and the
    TDIDT algorithm    · ID3 - Algorithm
                       · Other decision tree models
· ID3 - Algorithm
                            · Algorithms C4.5 and C5.0
· Other decision tree       · CART ~ Classification And Regression Trees
    models                  · CHAID ~ CHI-square Automatic Interaction

· Ensemble methods                       Detection

                       · Ensemble methods

                            · Bagging ~ bootstrapped aggregating
                            · Random forests
                            · Boosting and the AdaBoost algorithm

                       I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                            3
Decision trees ­ motivation

Indian call centers for the poorer customers only

Affluent account holders at Barclays bank will be connected to British call centers
while struggling customers will get Indian ones.

Barclays has found a new route to cut cost and make more profit - outsource jobs to India.
Struggling bank customers will be connected to Indian call centers while more affluent
account holders will get one in Britain. A new banking phone system will identify those with
low credit approvals and put them through to India, the Daily Mail reported.

A cap has been fixed. According to the report, those who have considerable savings or a
credit limit that allows them to borrow around £500 from the bank or buy its products will
be connected to a British operator.

The bank hopes that the new line will filter out their customers who do not have the money
to buy the bank's products so their British staff will potentially be able to sell to every caller.

Source: https://www.dnaindia.com/business/report-indian-call-centres-for-the-poorer-customers-only-1358853

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ  4
Decision trees ­ motivation

Indian call centers for the poorer customers only

Affluent account holders at Barclays bank will be connected to British call centers
while struggling customers will get Indian ones.

... continued from previous slide

The call center staff have been briefed that it will start on April 1, the paper said. "Before
we've had people ringing up who have been overdrawn, so we haven't been able to sell them
anything," a Barclays sales executive said. The idea, however, has drawn flak.

Critics say the bank is only interested in people with cash and not the genuine concerns of
millions who have queries about the state of their finances.

"This is an apartheid system and certainly preferential to their wealthier customers. This is not
intended to give the best advice, but a chance to make more money," Eddy Weatherill of the
Independent Banking Advisory Service was quoted as saying. A bank spokesman said:
"Customers will speak to different teams in different locations depending upon the nature of
their query."

Source: https://www.dnaindia.com/business/report-indian-call-centres-for-the-poorer-customers-only-1358853

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ  5
Decision trees

 Solution of classification tasks
 The built tree models the classification process

     Efficient building of trees
     Divides the feature space into rectangular regions

 Classification of patterns according to the region
   they belong to

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ  6
Decision trees (2)

Definition:

Let D be a database  = 1, ... ,  ; 1     ;  = 1, ... ,  .
Further, let us have the attributes { A1, A2, ..., An } and a set
of class labels C = { C1, ..., Cm }.

A decision tree for D is a tree, where:

  Each inner node is labeled by an attribute Aa ; 1    
  Each edge is labeled by a predicate (applicable to the attribute

    of the parent node)
  Each leaf has a class label Cj

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                       7
Decision trees (3)

A solution of classification tasks by means of decision trees
requires two steps to be done:

  Induction of the decision tree

       according to the available training data

      apply the built decision tree and determine the class label

Advantages:

   Easy to implement and interpret
   Efficient
   Extraction of simple rules
   Applicable also to big data sets

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                      8
Decision trees (4)

Disadvantages:

 Difficult to process continuous data
  (attribute categorization ~ divide the

feature space into rectangular regions)           REFUSE

 cannot be always used                         S             PERMIT
                                               U
                                               M                  INCOME

 Example: Bank loans

 Difficult to process for missing data

 Over-fitting  PRUNING

 Mutual correlations among the attributes
  are not considered

                I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ     9
Decision trees (5)

Decision attributes for the division of the data set:

   Label the decision nodes of the built tree

Decision predicates:

   Label the edges of the built tree

Stopping criterion:

   E.g., all patterns from the reduced set belong to the
     same class

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                             10
Decision trees (6)

Induction of a decision tree ­ the algorithm:

INPUT: D // training data
OUTPUT: T // decision tree
Building of a decision tree:
// a generic algorithm
T = {};
determine the best criterion for division;
T = form a root node and label it by a decision attribute;
T = add an edge for each decision predicate and label it;

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                               11
Decision trees (7)

Induction of a decision tree ­ the algorithm:

// continued
FOR each edge DO

  D´ = the data base formed due to the application of the decision
       predicate to D;

  IF the stopping criterion is fulfilled for the given path
      THEN
          T´ = create a leaf and label it by the corresponding class;
        ELSE
          T´ = generate a decision tree ( D´);

 T = add T´ to the edge

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                          12
Decision trees (8)

The algorithm TDIDT:

(~ Top Down Induction of Decision Trees)
  Induction of the trees by a top-down method
    (divide-and-conquer)

  The algorithm TDIDT:

       1. Choose one attribute as a root of the partial (sub)tree
       2. Divide the data arriving at this node into subsets according to the

            values of the chosen attribute and add a node for each subset
       3. If there is a node such that the data patterns arriving at it do not

            belong all to the same class, repeat the process for it starting from
            step 1;
            else stop

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                                      13
Decision trees (9)

The choice of an attribute applicable to branch the tree:

  The objective: choose such an attribute, that would best
    divide the patterns from different classes

  Entropy ~ measure of disorder in the system

 = - =1  log2 

pj ... probability of occurrence of class j (~ relative frequency of
     class j evaluated on the respective set of samples)

m ... the number of classes

( Notice: logbx = logax / logab with log2x = log10x / 0.301 ; 0 log20 = 0 by df.)

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ  14
Decision trees (10)

The evaluation of entropy for one attribute:

 For each possible value v of the considered attribute A ,
  compute the entropy H ( A ( v ) ) on a set of examples,
  that is covered by the category A ( v )

    =  -                              log2      
                                                
                  

          =1

 Compute the weighted average entropy H ( A ) as a

weighted sum of entropies H ( A ( v ) )

    =                   
                   
              

       I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                        15
Decision trees (11)

Application of decision trees to classify new patterns:

  The non-leaf nodes of the tree contain the information about
     the decision attributes used for branching

  The edges of the tree correspond to the values of these
     attributes

  The leaves of the tree contain the information about the
     assigned class

  Starting from the root of the tree, there is successively
     gathered the information about the values of the respective
     attributes

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                     16
Decision trees (12)

A transformation of a tree to a set of rules:

   Each path between the root and a leaf of a tree
    corresponds to a rule

   The non-leaf nodes (feature attributes) will appear
    (together with their value for the respective edge)
    on the left-hand side (in the body) of the rule

   The leaf node (target class attribute) will represent
    the right-hand side (head) of the rule

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                             17
Decision trees

Example: an application for a loan

Client  Income  Account  Gender  Unemployed             Loan approved
  C1     High     High   Female        No                      Yes
  C2     High     High    Male         No                      Yes
  C3      Low     Low     Male         No                      No
  C4      Low     High   Female        Yes                     Yes
  C5      Low     High    Male         Yes                     Yes
  C6      Low     Low    Female        Yes                     No
  C7     High     Low     Male         No                      Yes
  C8     High     Low    Female        Yes                     Yes
  C9      Low             Male         Yes                     No
 C10     High   Middle   Female        No                      Yes
 C11      Low   Middle   Female        Yes                     No
 C12      Low   Middle    Male         No                      Yes
                Middle

                         I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                 18
Decision trees

Example: an application for a loan (2)

A four-field contingency table for the attributes income and
loan approved:

Income high      Loan approved - Yes               Loan approved - No
Income low                    5                                 0
                              3                                 4

The choice of the decision attribute according to minimum
entropy:

   INCOME:

             5                                  7
  = 12    + 12    =

             = 5  0 + 7  0.9852 = 0.5747
             12  12

                 I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                         19
Decision trees

Example: an application for a loan (3)

The choice of the decision attribute according
to minimum entropy:

  INCOME (continued):

    = -+ log2 + - - log2 - =
          5 50 0

    = - 5 log2 5 - 5 log2 5 = 0 + 0 = 0

   = -+ log2 + - - log2 - =

    =  -  3  log2  3  -            4  log2  4  =  0.9852
          7        7               7        7

    I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                         20
Decision trees

Example: an application for a loan (4)

The choice of the decision attribute according

to minimum entropy:

 ACCOUNT:                4                      +
                     = 12   

                         4
                     + 12    +

                         4
                     + 12    =

                     1                    1  1
                     = 3  0 + 3  1 + 3  1 = 0.6667

           I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ           21
Decision trees

Example: an application for a loan (5)

The choice of the decision attribute according
to minimum entropy:

 GENDER:

                          6
     = 12    +

    6
+ 12    =

1  1
= 2  0.9183 + 2  0.9183 = 0.9183

   I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                22
Decision trees

Example: an application for a loan (6)

The choice of the decision attribute according
to minimum entropy:

  UNEMPLOYED:

                                  6
    = 12    +

+ 6    =

     12

1  1
= 2  1 + 2  0.65 = 0.825

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                   23
Decision trees

Example: an application for a loan (7)

The choice of the decision attribute according to minimum entropy:

 The first branching for the attribute INCOME: 2 classes

 INCOME ( HIGH ): LOAN APPROVED ( YES ) for all patterns
 INCOME ( LOW ): 7 clients + branching

 ACCOUNT:

           2                                 3
  = 7    + 7    +

                 2
              + 7    = 0.3935

 GENDER: H ( GENDER ) = 0.965

 UNEMPLOYED: H ( UNEMPLOYED ) = 0.9792

              I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                         24
Decision trees

Example: an application for a loan (8)

The choice of the decision attribute according to minimum entropy:

 The second branching according to the attribute ACCOUNT: 3 classes

        ACCOUNT ( HIGH ): LOAN APPROVED ( YES ) for all patterns
        ACCOUNT ( LOW ): LOAN APPROVED ( NO ) for all patterns
        ACCOUNT ( MIDDLE ): 3 clients + branching

 GENDER:

          2                              1
  = 3    + 3    =

          2  1
          = 3  1 + 3  0 = 0.6667

 UNEMPLOYED: H ( UNEMPLOYED ) = 0

 The third branching according to the attribute UNEMPLOYED

          I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                              25
Decision trees

Example: an application for a loan (9)

The induced decision tree:

   HIGH  INCOME
YES                              LOW

                                      ACCOUNT

         HIGH                           MIDDLE         LOW

         YES                          UNEMPLOYED       NO
                    YES
                                                  NO
                 NO
                                                  YES

         I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                      26
Decision trees

Example: an application for a loan (10)

A transformation of the induced tree to rules:

   IF INCOME ( HIGH ) THEN LOAN APPROVED ( YES )

   IF INCOME ( LOW )  ACCOUNT ( HIGH )

           THEN LOAN APPROVED ( YES )

   IF INCOME ( LOW )  ACCOUNT ( LOW )

           THEN LOAN APPROVED ( NO )

   IF INCOME ( LOW )  ACCOUNT ( MIDDLE ) 

           UNEMPLOYED ( YES ) THEN LOAN APPROVED ( NO )

   IF INCOME PRIJEM ( LOW )  ACCOUNT ( MIDDLE ) 

           UNEMPLOYED ( NO ) THEN LOAN APPROVED ( YES )

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                            27
Decision trees (13)

Factors important for the induction of a decision tree:

   The choice of the decision attributes

       The impact on the efficiency of the built tree
       ´informed´ expert entry for the considered area

   The order of the decision attributes

       Eliminate redundant comparisons

   Branching

       The number of necessary divisions
       More demanding for continuous values or many values

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                               28
Decision trees (14)

Factors important for the induction of a decision tree:

  The form of the built tree

      More suitable are balanced trees with as few levels as possible
         x more complex comparisons

      Some algorithms create binary trees only (often quite deep)

  Stopping criteria

      Correct classification of the training data
      Early stopping prevents building of large trees and overtraining

            accuracy x efficiency
      Occam´s razor (William of Occam ­ 1320)

         preference of the simplest hypothesis for D

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                           29
Decision trees (15)

Factors important for the induction of a decision tree:

  Training data and their quantity

      Too few  the formed tree might be not reliable
         enough for more general data

      Too many  the danger of overtraining

  Pruning

      A higher accuracy and efficiency for the tested data
      Removal of redundant comparisons, or entire subtrees,

         and irrelevant attributes, resp.
      Overtraining  removal of entire subtrees at lower

         levels

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                30
Decision trees (16)

Factors important for the induction of a decision tree:

  Pruning (continued)

       Can be done already during tree induction
             avoids forming of excessively large trees

       A different approach ­ pruning of already formed trees

  Time and space complexity

       Depends on the number of training data p , the number of
          attributes n and the form of the induced tree ­ depth,
          branching

       The time complexity of the tree induction: O ( n p log p )
       The time complexity of the classification of q patterns with

          a tree of the depth O ( log p ) : O ( q log p )

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                        31
METHODS:               Contents:

DECISION               · Motivation and the TDIDT algorithm
TREES
                           · Top Down Induction of Decision Trees
Contents:                  · Example
                           · Important factors
· Motivation and the
    TDIDT algorithm    · ID3 - Algorithm
                       · Other decision tree models
· ID3 - Algorithm
                           · Algorithms C4.5 and C5.0
· Other decision tree      · CART ~ Classification And Regression Trees
    models                 · CHAID ~ CHI-square Automatic Interaction

· Ensemble methods                      Detection

                       · Ensemble methods

                           · Bagging ~ bootstrapped aggregating
                           · Random forests
                           · Boosting and the AdaBoost algorithm

                       I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                           32
Decision trees (17)

ID3 ­ Algorithm (~ Iterative Dichotomiser, Ross Quinlan, 1986):

  Training of functions with Boolean values
  Greedy method
  Builds the tree in a top-down manner
  In each node, it chooses such an attribute that best classifies

    local training data
     the best attribute has the biggest information gain
  The process continues until all the training data are classified
    correctly, or until all the attributes have been used

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                       33
Decision trees (18)

ID3 ­ Algorithm (continued):

  EXAMPLES ~ training data (patterns)
  TARGET_ATTRIBUTE ~ attribute, the value of which shall the tree

    predict (class)
  ATTRIBUTES ~ the list of attributes to be tested by the built tree
  Returns the decision tree that correctly classifies the provided

    training data (EXAMPLES)
  Entropy ~ measure of disorder (~ ,,surprise") in the training set
  Information gain ~ expected entropy reduction after dividing the

    data according to the considered attribute
  Preference of ´smaller´ trees x over-training

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                         34
Decision trees (19)

ID3 ­ Algorithm (continued):

ID3(EXAMPLES, TARGET_ATTRIBUTE, ATTRIBUTES)
  Build a root ROOT of the tree
  IF all EXAMPLES are positive, RETURN tree ROOT ,

         that has a single node and is labelled ´+´
  IF all EXAMPLES are negative, RETURN tree ROOT,

         that has a single node and is labelled ´-´
  IF ATTRIBUTES = {} , RETURN tree ROOT ,

         that has a single node and is labelled by the most
         frequent value TARGET_ATTRIBUTE in EXAMPLES

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                35
Decision trees (20)

// ID3(EXAMPLES, TARGET_ATTRIBUTE, ATTRIBUTES)

// continued

   ELSE BEGIN
     · A <= attribute from ATTRIBUTES , that best classifies
         EXAMPLES

     · Decision attribute for ROOT <= A

     · For all possible values vi of the attribute A
             · Attach a new edge to ROOT, that corresponds
                 to the predicate A = vi
             · Let EXAMPLESvi be a subset of EXAMPLES
                 with the value vi for A

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                 36
Decision trees (21)

// ID3(EXAMPLES, TARGET_ATTRIBUTE, ATTRIBUTES)
// continued

        · IF EXAMPLESvi = {}
              · Attach a leaf to the edge and label it by the
                 most frequent value TARGET_ATTRIBUTE in
                 EXAMPLES
              · ELSE attach a subtree ID3(EXAMPLESvi ,
                 TARGET_ATTRIBUTE, ATTRIBUTES - {A})
                 to the edge

    · END
    · RETURN ROOT

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                  37
Decision trees (22)

ID3 ­ Algorithm (continued):

 Criterion for data division: information gain

    · evaluation by means of entropy:

            · m ... classes
            · pj ... probability of class j

                       ( ~ number of patterns from class j / the number
                           of all patterns from the training set EXAMPLES )

                                                                   

          =  -  

                                                                  =

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                                38
Decision trees (23)

ID3 ­ Algorithm (continued):

 Criterion for data division: information gain

   · Information gain - GAIN:

       · A ... the considered attribute
       · VALUES(A) ... set of all possible values for the attribute A

 ,  =   -

-       
     

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                          39
METHODS:               Contents:

DECISION               · Motivation and the TDIDT algorithm
TREES
                            · Top Down Induction of Decision Trees
Contents:                   · Example
                            · Important factors
· Motivation and the
    TDIDT algorithm    · ID3 - Algorithm
                       · Other decision tree models
· ID3 - Algorithm
                            · Algorithms C4.5 and C5.0
· Other decision tree       · CART ~ Classification And Regression Trees
    models                  · CHAID ~ CHI-square Automatic Interaction

· Ensemble methods                       Detection

                       · Ensemble methods

                            · Bagging ~ bootstrapped aggregating
                            · Random forests
                            · Boosting and the AdaBoost algorithm

                       I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                            40
Decision trees (24)

Algorithm C4.5 (Ross Quinlan - 1993):

  A modification of the ID3-algorithm

  Missing data

     · Ignored during tree construction
          when evaluating the criterion for data division, only the
             known values of the given attribute will be considered

     · During classification, the missing values will be estimated
        based on the values known for other patterns

  Continuous data

     · The data is categorized according to the values of the
         respective attribute on the patterns from the training set

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                        41
Decision trees (25)

Algorithm C4.5 (continued):

  Pruning

     · Validation: divide the training data into a training set (2/3)
        and a validation set (1/3)

     · Replacement of subtrees (reduced ­ error pruning) by
        leaves labeled by the most frequent class in the respective
        training patterns

           · The new tree must not perform worse on the validation
              set than the original one!

           · Otherwise, the subtree will be not replaced

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                          42
Decision trees (26)

Algorithm C4.5 (continued):

  Pruning

      · Subtree raising

            · A replacement of a subtree by its most frequently used
                subtree ­ this subtree will then be raised to a higher level

            · Test the classification accuracy

  Rule post-pruning

      · Inference of a decision tree based on the training set
         ­ over-training is allowed

      · Conversion of the built tree to an equivalent set of rules

            · For each path from the root to a leaf, there will be extracted
                a rule

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                                 43
Decision trees (27)

Algorithm C4.5 (continued):

  Rule post-pruning:

     · Prune (~ generalize) the rules by eliminating all possible
        assumptions if it does not impact a worse estimated
        classification accuracy

     · Order pruned rules according to their expected accuracy

           · Then, use the rules in this order to classify the patterns

     easier and more radical pruning than in the case of the
         complete decision trees

     transparent and easy to understand rules

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                            44
Decision trees (28)

Algorithm C4.5 (continued):

 An estimation of the accuracy of rules and trees, resp.

· A standard approach - use a validation set

· C4.5:

     · An evaluation of the accuracy on the training data

~ The ratio of patterns correctly classified by the rule and

all patterns covered by the rule   = 1

                                          

· An assessment of the standard deviation of the accuracy

~ Binomial distribution is assumed when looking
  for the probability of obtaining a given number of
  correct decisions for the considered number of patterns

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                 45
Decision trees (29)

Algorithm C4.5 (continued):

  An estimation of the accuracy of rules and trees, resp.

      Take the lower accuracy bound determined for the chosen
          confidence interval as the respective rule characteristics

       · Example: For the confidence interval computed at the
                       95% confidence level, the lower accuracy
                       bound for new data will correspond to:

            ACCURACY_ON_THE_TRAINING_DATA ­
                   ­ 1.96 x STANDARD_DEVIATION ~  - 1.96   1 -

                                                                                                                                         

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                                                                                              46
Decision trees (30)

Algorithm C4.5 (continued):

  The criterion for data division: information gain ratio

_ ,  =

=          , 
     -  
                               log2  
                                     

 For data division, the attribute with the biggest
  information gain ratio will be used

      disadvantages excessive branching

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                              47
Decision trees (31)

Algorithm C5.0:

  A commercial version of C4.5 for large databases
  A similar induction of the decision tree
  Improved (more efficient) generation of rules
  A higher accuracy is achieved:

      · Boosting (~ a combination of several classifiers)

            · Based on the original training data, various training (sub)sets
                will be built

            · To each training pattern, there is assigned a weight
                corresponding to its impact during classification

            · For each weight combination, a separate classifiers is formed
            · Each classifier has its own vote during the subsequent

                classification, the majority (class) wins

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                                  48
Gini-index G: for an attribute with r values v1 ,..., vr , n data patterns, and m classes: G==1    with G(vi) = 1- =1 2 and =1  = n
( is the nr. of data patterns taking on the value vi ; pj denotes the probability of occurrence of class j in the ni data patterns).

   Decision trees (32)

Classification and regression trees ­ algorithm CART:

~ Classification And Regression Trees

 Generates binary trees

 The choice of the best decision attribute for data division
   ­ entropy, Gini-index (lower values of G imply better discrimination)

 During each data division, just two edges are formed

 Data division is performed according to the ´best´ data point found
   for the respective node t

 Check all possible values v of decision attribute A,    

    · L, R ........ left-hand-side, resp. right-hand-side subtree

· PL , PR ... probability of processing by the respective subtree

  =      _______
     _______

                         I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                    49
Decision trees (33)

Classification and regression trees (continued):

 Check all possible values v of the decision attribute A,    
    · in the case of equality, the right-hand-side subtree will be used
    · P(Cj | tL ), P(Cj | tR ) ... probability, that the pattern belongs to
                                   class Cj and is in the left-hand-side, resp.
                                   the right-hand-side subtree (of node t)
                  ________
      = ______

· The choice of the criterion for data division:

                                                

             = 2    -  

                                               =1

         (maximum values for all patterns from the considered class grouped in the same subtree)

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                                                     50
Decision trees (34)

Classification and regression trees (continued):

   Characteristic properties of CART:

      · The order of the attributes corresponds to their impact
         during classification

      · Missing data is ignored ­ and will be not counted towards
         the evaluation of the decision criteria

      · The stopping criterion:

            · No further division would improve classification accuracy

      · A high accuracy achieved on the training set does not
         have to reflect the accuracy on the test data

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                            51
Decision trees (35)

Algorithm CHAID:

~ Chi-square Automatic Interaction Detection
  The criterion for branching: 2
  The algorithm automatically groups together the values of

     the categorical attributes

       · Attribute values are gradually grouped together starting from
          the original number till there are just two groups of them only

       · Subsequently, there will be selected such an attribute and its
          categorization that are the best ones for data division at the
          given step

       during branching, there will be not created as many branches
          as there are attribute values

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                              52
Decision trees (36)

Algorithm CHAID ­ grouping of attribute values:

  1. Repeat, till there are just two groups of attribute values only

        a) Choose such a pair of attribute categories that are most similar one to
               the other from the point of view of 2 and that can be merged

        b) Consider the new attribute category to be a possible grouping to be
               performed at the given step

  2. For each of the possible groups of values, test their relevance to the
      predictor variable by means of the 2 ­test

  3. Choose the grouping that yields the ´best´ grouping of attribute values

     with the most significant split

  4. Determine, if this grouping contributes in a statistically significant way
      to distinguishing the patterns from different classes

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                                       53
METHODS:               Contents:

DECISION               · Motivation and the TDIDT algorithm
TREES
                            · Top Down Induction of Decision Trees
Contents:                   · Example
                            · Important factors
· Motivation and the
    TDIDT algorithm    · ID3 - Algorithm
                       · Other decision tree models
· ID3 - Algorithm
                            · Algorithms C4.5 and C5.0
· Other decision tree       · CART ~ Classification And Regression Trees
    models                  · CHAID ~ CHI-square Automatic Interaction

· Ensemble methods                       Detection

                       · Ensemble methods

                            · Bagging ~ bootstrapped aggregating
                            · Random forests
                            · Boosting and the AdaBoost algorithm

                       I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                            54
Bagging ~ bootstrapped aggregating

Attempts to reduce the variance of the classifier.

 · if the variance of a classifier is 2, then the variance of the average of k
     independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) classifiers reduces to
     2/k

 · bagging works best when the individual classifiers from various
     ensemble components satisfy the i.i.d. property.

 · decision trees are an ideal choice for bagging as they have a low bias
     and high variance (if they are grown sufficiently deep)

 x bagging does not reduce the model bias and for cases in which the
     bias is the primary source of error, it may even slightly worsen
     accuracy due to correlations between the ensemble components (and
     the failed i.i.d. assumption)

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING  55
Bagging ~ bootstrapped aggregating

Approximation of i.i.d. classifiers in bagging?

 ~ the data points are sampled uniformly from the original data with replacement

   = > bootstrapping:

          · a sample is drawn of approximately the same size as the original data
          · the drawn sample may comprise duplicates and contains a fraction of roughly

              1 - (1 - 1/n)n  1 - 1/e distinct data points from the original data, i.e., 63,2%;
              e represents the base of the natural logarithm.
          · the probability of a data point being not included in a sample is (1 - 1/n)n
          · a total of k different bootstrapped samples, each of size n, are drawn
              independently, and a classifier is trained on each of them
          · for a given test instance, the predicted class label is reported by the ensemble
              as the dominant vote of the different classifiers

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING  56
Random Forests

 If the k different classifiers, each with variance 2, have a positive
   pairwise correlation of  between them, then the variance of the
   averaged prediction can be shown to be  · 2 + ( ( 1 -  ) · 2 ) / k

 The term  · 2 is invariant to the number of components k in the
   ensemble. This term limits the performance gains from bagging.

 Random forests are defined as an ensemble of decision trees, in
   which randomness has explicitly been inserted into the model
   building process of each decision tree.

 Random forests can be viewed as a generalization of the basic
   bagging method, as applied to decision trees. In addition,
   bootstrapped decision trees tend to be positively correlated.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                                                 57
Random Forests (2)

 Unfortunately, correlated trees limit the amount of error reduction
   obtained from bagging.

 The idea is to use a randomized decision tree model with less
    correlation between the different ensemble components.

 The underlying variability can then be more effectively reduced by
   an averaging approach.

 The obtained results are often more accurate than a direct
   application of bagging on decision trees

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING  58
Random Forests (3)

The main idea:

  if one tree is good, then many trees (a forest) should be better, if there is
     enough variety between the trees

  Introduce randomness to the standard dataset ­ two options:

       · Bagging - make the trees different by training them on slightly
           different data (bootstrap samples from the dataset for each tree)

       · Limited number of features - at each node, a random subset of the
           features is given to the tree, and it can only pick from that subset
           rather than from the whole set.

          This also speeds up training due to fewer features to search over at
           each stage and there is no need to prune the trees

       + Reduced variance does not negatively affect the bias

  Once the set of trees are trained, the output of the forest can be
     determined as the majority vote for classification.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                                                          59
Random Forests (4)

The Basic Random Forest Training Algorithm:

  For each of N trees:

      · create a new bootstrap sample of the training set
      · use this bootstrap sample to train a decision tree
      · at each node of the decision tree, randomly select m features, and compute the

           information gain only on that set of features, selecting the optimal one
      · repeat until the tree is complete

Parameters:

   · the number of features
          · a subset size that is the square root of the number of features seems
              to be common (random forests are not too sensitive to this parameter)

   · the number of trees for the forest
          · building trees can be continued until the error stops decreasing

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING  60
Boosting

The main principle:

 a weight is associated with each training pattern, and different
    classifiers are trained using these weights

 the weights of the patterns are iteratively modified based on the
    performance of the classifier

     future models to be constructed depend on previous models
     each classifier is constructed using the same algorithm on a different

        weighted training set

The idea:
 In future iterations, focus on misclassified patterns by increasing

    their relative weight
 By iteratively using this approach and creating a weighted

    combination of the various classifiers, it is possible to create a
    classifier with a lower overall bias

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                                                      61
The AdaBoost algorithm

(Freund & Schapire, 1996)

Algorithm AdaBoost(Data Set: D, Base Classifier: A, Maximum Rounds: T)

begin                                                     t is the fraction of incorrectly
  t = 0;                                                  predicted training instances
  for each instance i initialize the weight W1(i)=1/n;
  repeat                                                  (computed after weighting
    t = t + 1;
                                                          with Wt(i)) by the model in
                                                          the t-th iteration

Determine weighted error rate t on D when the base algorithm A is applied
             to the weighted data set with the weights Wt(·);

t = (1/2) loge ( (1 - t )/ t );  et = 1 - tt

for each misclassified Xi  D do Wt+1(i) = Wt(i)et = Wt(i) ·  - tt ;

        else (correctly classified instance) do Wt+1(i) = Wt(i) e- t = Wt(i) · t  - t ;
    for each instance Xi do normalize Wt+1(i) = Wt+1(i) / [ j Wt+1(j) ] , (1jn);
  until ((t  T) OR ( t = 0) OR (t  0.5));
  Use ensemble components with weights t for test instance classification;
end

                                 I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                                 63
The AdaBoost algorithm: Summary

Training

· Produces a sequence of classifiers (with the same base learner)

· Each classifier depends on the previous one, and focuses on the previous
    one's errors

· Examples that are incorrectly predicted in previous classifiers are given
    higher weights

Testing

· For a test case, the results of the series of classifiers are combined to
    determine the final class of the test case

· The actual performance depends on the data and the base learner

· Susceptible to noise => when the number of outliers is very large, the
    emphasis placed on the hard examples can hurt the performance

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                                                      64
Random Forests vs. Boosting

Random Forests:                             Boosting:

· random forests are fast - they can run    · boosting is exhaustive ­
   in parallel and search over a small set      searches over the entire feature
   of features at each stage                    set at each stage, and each
                                                stage depends on the previous
 as the trees are cheaper to train, we          one
   can grow more of them in the same
   computational time, even on large and     boosting must run sequentially,
   complicated datasets                         and can be expensive

 can produce surprisingly good results in   · for the same number of trees,
   comparison to the small parts of the         boosting outperforms random
   problem space seen by each tree              forests (as random forests
                                                search only a small subset of the
                                                data at each stage)

                 I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING               65
