Data Mining

SUPPORT VECTOR MACHINES

BY: IVETA MRÁZOVÁ
Introduction to SVM

Support vector machines were invented by V. Vapnik and
his co-workers in 1970s in Russia and became known to
the West in 1992.

SVMs are linear classifiers that find a hyperplane to
separate two class of data, positive and negative.

Kernel functions are used for nonlinear separation.

SVM not only has a rigorous theoretical foundation, but
also performs classification more accurately than most
other methods in applications, especially for high
dimensional data.

It belongs to the best classifiers for text classification.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)                                   2
Basic concepts

Let the set of training examples D be

        {(x1, y1), (x2, y2), ..., (xr, yr)},
where xi = (x1, x2, ..., xn) is an input vector in a real-valued
space X  Rn and yi is its class label (output value), yi {1, -1}.
1: positive class and -1: negative class.

SVM finds a linear function of the form (w: weight vector)

f(x) = w  x + b

       1  if w  xi  + b  0
yi = -1   if w  xi  + b  0

          I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)                        3
The hyperplane

The hyperplane that separates positive and negative training

data is  w  x + b = 0

It is also called the decision boundary (surface).

So many possible hyperplanes, which one to choose?

         I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)                 4
Maximal margin hyperplane

SVM looks for the separating hyperplane with the largest margin.
Machine learning theory says this hyperplane minimizes the error
bound

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)  5
Linear SVM: separable case

  Assume the data are linearly separable.
  Consider a positive data point (x+, 1) and a negative (x-, -1) that are
  closest to the hyperplane

           <w  x> + b = 0.
  We define two parallel hyperplanes, H+ and H-, that pass through x+
  and x- respectively. H+ and H- are also parallel to <w  x> + b = 0.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)  6
Compute the margin

Now let us compute the distance between the two margin                          in
hyperplanes  H+  and  H-.  Their  distance  is         the  margin  (d+  +  d-      the
figure).

Recall from vector space in algebra that the (perpendicular)
distance from a point xi to the hyperplane w  x + b = 0 is:

                 | w xi + b |                                                       (36)

                      || w ||

where ||w|| is the norm of w,

|| w ||=  w  w  = w12 + w22 + ...+ wn2 (37)

                           I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)                               7
Compute the margin (cont ...)

Let us compute d+.

Instead of computing the distance from x+ to the separating
hyperplane w  x + b = 0, we pick up any point xs on w  x
+ b = 0 and compute the distance from xs to w  x+ + b = 1
by applying the distance Eq. (36) and noticing w  xs + b = 0,

d+  =  | w  xs  + b -1|               =      1     (38)
                 || w ||                  || w ||

margin =  d+  + d-  =                 ||  2        (39)
                                          w ||
                                                   8
          I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)
A optimization problem!

Definition (Linear SVM: separable case): Given a set of linearly
separable training examples,

D = {(x1, y1), (x2, y2), ..., (xr, yr)}

Learning is to solve the following constrained minimization
problem,
Minimize : w  w
               2
                                                             (40)

Subject to: yi (w  xi  + b)  1, i = 1, 2, ..., r

yi (w  xi  + b  1, i = 1, 2, ..., r  summarizes

w  xi + b  1 for yi = 1

w  xi + b  -1     for yi = -1.

                  I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)                 9
Solve the constrained minimization

Standard Lagrangian method

= LP1           r    i[ yi (w  xi 
   2  w  w  -  i =1                              + b)  -1]  (41)

where i  0 are the Lagrange multipliers.

Optimization theory says that an optimal solution to (41)
must satisfy certain conditions, called Kuhn-Tucker
conditions, which are necessary (but not sufficient)

Kuhn-Tucker conditions play a central role in constrained
optimization.

                     I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)             10
Kuhn-Tucker conditions

Eq. (50) is the original set of constraints.

The complementarity condition (52) shows that only those data points

on the margin hyperplanes (i.e., H+ and H-) can have i > 0 since for

them yi(w  xi + b) ­ 1 = 0.
These points are called the support vectors, All the other parameters

i = 0.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)  11
Solve the problem

In general, Kuhn-Tucker conditions are necessary for an optimal
solution, but not sufficient.

However, for our minimization problem with a convex objective
function and linear constraints, the Kuhn-Tucker conditions are
both necessary and sufficient for an optimal solution.

Solving the optimization problem is still a difficult task due to the
inequality constraints.

However, the Lagrangian treatment of the convex optimization
problem leads to an alternative dual formulation of the problem,
which is easier to solve than the original problem (called the
primal).

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)  12
Dual formulation

From primal to a dual: Setting to zero the partial
derivatives of the Lagrangian (41) with respect to the
primal variables (i.e., w and b), and substituting the
resulting relations back into the Lagrangian.

    I.e., substitute (48) and (49), into the original Lagrangian (41) to eliminate the
       primal variables

    r       1      r
            2      j =1
      i

   i =1
  LD=    -               yi  y  j i        j  xi   x j ,

               i,

                                                          (55)

               I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)                 13
Dual optimization problem

 This dual formulation is called the Wolfe dual.

 For the convex objective function and linear constraints of
   the primal, it has the property that the maximum of LD occurs

   at the same values of w, b and i, as the minimum of LP (the

   primal).

 Solving (56) requires numerical techniques and clever
   strategies, which are beyond our scope.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)  14
The final decision boundary

After solving  (56), we obtain the values for       biu, swinhgicEhqauraetiuosnesd(4to8)
compute the    weight vector w and the bias
and (52) respectively.

The decision boundary

 w  x + b = yii xi  x + b = 0                         (57)

                             isv

Testing: Use (57). Given a test instance z,

                                                    
sign(w  z + b) = sign i yi xi  z + b (58)
                         isv                        

If (58) returns 1, then the test instance z is classified as positive;
otherwise, it is classified as negative.

                        I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)    15
How to deal with nonlinear separation?

The SVM formulations require linear separation.

Real-life data sets may need nonlinear separation.

To deal with nonlinear separation, the same formulat-
ion and techniques as for the linear case are still used.

We only transform the input data into another space
(usually of a much higher dimension) so that

   a linear decision boundary can separate positive and
      negative examples in the transformed space,

The transformed space is called the feature space. The
original data space is called the input space.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)              27
Space transformation

The basic idea is to map the data in the input space

X to a feature space F via a nonlinear mapping ,

:X F                                       (76)

x  (x)

After the mapping, the original training data set
{(x1, y1), (x2, y2), ..., (xr, yr)} becomes:

{((x1), y1), ((x2), y2), ..., ((xr), yr)}  (77)

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)                         28
Geometric interpretation

 In this example, the transformed space is also 2-D.
   But usually, the number of dimensions in the feature
   space is much higher than that in the input space

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)  29
Optimization problem in (40) becomes

 With the transformation, the optimization problem in (40) becomes

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)                                          30
An example space transformation

Suppose our input space is 2-dimensional, and we
choose the following transformation (mapping)
from 2-D to 3-D:

       (x1, x2 )  (x12 , x22 , 2x1x2 )

The training example ((2, 3), -1) in the input space
is transformed to the following in the feature
space:

           ((4, 9, 8.5), -1)

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)                            31
Problem with explicit transformation

The potential problem with this explicit data trans-
formation and then applying the linear SVM is that
it may suffer from the curse of dimensionality.

The number of dimensions in the feature space can
be huge with some useful transformations even with
reasonable numbers of attributes in the input space.

This makes it computationally infeasible to handle.

Fortunately, explicit transformation is not needed.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)  32
Kernel functions

We notice that in the dual formulation both

   the construction of the optimal hyperplane (79) in F and
   the evaluation of the corresponding decision function (80)

only require dot products (x)  (z) and never the map-
ped vector (x) in its explicit form. This is a crucial point.

Thus, if we have a way to compute the dot product

(x)  (z) using the input vectors x and z directly,

   no need to know the feature vector (x) or even  itself.

In SVM, this is done through the use of kernel functions,

denoted by K : K(x, z) = (x)  (z)

                                                          (82)

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)                                  33
An example kernel function

Polynomial kernel: K(x, z) = x  zd                      (83)

Let us compute the kernel with degree d = 2 in a
2-dimensional space: x = (x1, x2) and z = (z1, z2).

x  z 2 = ( x1z1 + x 2 z 2 )2                            (84)
          = x12 z12 + 2x1z1x 2 z 2 + x 2 2 z 2 2

= ( x12, x 2 2, 2 x1x 2 )  ( z12, z 2 2 , 2 z1z 2 )

=  (x)  (z),

This shows that the kernel x  z2 is a dot product in a
transformed feature space

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)                              34
Kernel trick

 The derivation in (84) is only for illustration
 purposes.
 We do not need to find the mapping function.
 We can apply the kernel function directly by

    replace all the dot products (x)  (z) in (79) and (80)

       with the kernel function K(x, z) (e.g., the polynomial
       kernel x  zd in (83)).

 This strategy is called the kernel trick.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)  35
Is it a kernel function?

 The question is: how do we know whether a
 function is a kernel without performing the
 derivation such as that in (84)? I.e,

    How do we know that a kernel function is indeed a dot
       product in some feature space?

 This question is answered by a theorem called the
 Mercer's theorem, which we will not discuss here.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)  36
Commonly used kernels

It is clear that the idea of kernel generalizes the dot
product in the input space. This dot product is also a
kernel with the feature map being the identity

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)  37
Some other issues in SVM

SVM works only in a real-valued space. For a categorical
attribute, we need to convert its categorical values to
numeric values.

SVM does only two-class classification. For multi-class
problems, some strategies can be applied, e.g., one-
against-rest, and error-correcting output coding.

The hyperplane produced by SVM is hard to understand
by human users. The matter is made worse by kernels.
Thus, SVM is commonly used in applications that do not
required human understanding.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: ATNS (NAIL013)  38
Data Mining

EVALUATION OF CLASSIFIERS

BY: IVETA MRÁZOVÁ
Evaluating classification methods

 Predictive accuracy

Accuracy  =     
                      

 Efficiency: time to construct the model

time to use the model

 Robustness: handling noise and missing values

 Scalability: efficiency in disk-resident databases

 Interpretability: clarity and insight provided by the model
 Compactness of the model:

       size of the tree, the number of rules, ...

                      I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                 40
Evaluation methods

 Holdout set: The available data set D is divided into
  two disjoint subsets,

   · the training set Dtrain (for learning a model)
   · the test set Dtest (for testing the model)

 Important: training set should not be used in testing
  and the test set should not be used in learning.

   · Unseen test set provides an unbiased estimate of accuracy.

 The test set is also called the holdout set. (the
  examples in the original data set D are all labeled
  with classes.)

 This method is mainly used for a large data set D.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING  41
Evaluation methods (cont.)

k-fold cross-validation:

 The available data is partitioned uniformly into k equal-
  size disjoint subsets.

 Use each subset as a test set and combine the remaining
  k-1 subsets as the training set to learn a classifier.

 The procedure is run k times yielding k accuracies
  Accuracyi ; 1ik

 The final estimated accuracy  of learning is
  the average of the k accuracies:

  =                         =  
                          

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                                     43
Evaluation methods (cont.)

k-fold cross-validation:

 Estimation of the approximate N% confidence intervals:

  ,- ,

where  is an estimate of standard deviation of the distribution

governing :

 =                        =(                        - )2
             (-)

 Values of , for two-sided confidence intervals:             Confidence level N%
                                                               90% 95% 99%
     often, , is set to 1.96 (for  =  and N = 95%)   = 2 2.92 4.30 9.92
                                                     = 10 1.81 2.23 3.17
 10-fold and 5-fold cross-validations are common.    = 30 1.70 2.04 2.75
 This method shall be used rather for small data.

                                                     =  1.64 1.96 2.58

                          I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                44
Evaluation methods (cont.)

 Leave-one-out cross-validation: This method is used
   when the data set is very small.

 It is a special case of cross-validation
 Each fold of the cross validation has only a single test

   example and all the rest of the data is used in training.
 If the original data has m examples, this is m-fold cross-

   validation

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                                       45
Evaluation methods (cont.)

  Validation set: available data is divided into 3 subsets,

      · a training set,
      · a validation set and
      · a test set.

  A validation set is used frequently for estimating
    parameters in learning algorithms.

  In such cases, the values that give the best accuracy on
    the validation set are used as the final parameter values.

  Cross-validation can be used for parameter estimating
    as well.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING  46
Classification measures

 Accuracy is only one measure (error = 1-accuracy).

 Accuracy is not suitable in some applications.

 In text mining, we may only be interested in the documents of
   a particular topic, which are only a small portion of a big
   document collection.

 In classification involving skewed or highly imbalanced data,
   e.g., network intrusion and financial fraud detections, we are
   interested only in the minority class.

    · High accuracy does not mean any intrusion is detected.

    · E.g., 1% intrusion. Achieve 99% accuracy by doing nothing.

 The class of interest is commonly called the positive class, and
   the rest negative classes.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING  47
Precision and recall measures

 Used in information retrieval and text classification.
 We use a confusion matrix to introduce them.

 TP ­ the number of correct classifications of the positive examples (true positive)
 FN ­ the number of incorrect classifications of positive examples (false negative)
 FP ­ the number of incorrect classifications of negative examples (false positive)
 TN ­ the number of correct classifications of negative examples (true negative)

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                                  48
Precision and recall measures (cont...)

                                             
 =  +                                =  + 

 Precision p is the number of correctly classified positive
  examples divided by the total number of examples that are
  classified as positive.

 Recall r is the number of correctly classified positive
  examples divided by the total number of actual positive
  examples in the test set.

           I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING             49
An example

 This confusion matrix yields

   · precision p = 100% and
   · recall r = 1%

       because we only classified one positive example correctly
       and no negative examples wrongly.

 Note: precision and recall measure classification only
          on the positive class.

            I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                               50
F1-value (also called F1-score)

 It is hard to compare two classifiers using two measures. F1 score
   combines precision and recall into one measure

1  =  2
      +

F1-score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall

1  =  1  2  1
            
         +

 The harmonic mean of two numbers tends to be closer to the
   smaller of the two.

 For F1-value to be large, both p and r much be large.

         I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                                     51
Another evaluation method:

Scoring and ranking

 Scoring is related to classification.

 We are interested in a single class (positive class),
  e.g., buyers class in a marketing database.

 Instead of assigning each test instance a definite
  class, scoring assigns a probability estimate (PE)
  to indicate the likelihood that the example
  belongs to the positive class.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING  52
Ranking and lift analysis

 After each example is given a PE score, we can
  rank all examples according to their PEs.

 We then divide the data into n (say 10) bins. A lift
  curve can be drawn according how many positive
  examples are in each bin. This is called lift
  analysis.

 Classification systems can be used for scoring.
  Need to produce a probability estimate.

   · E.g., in decision trees, we can use the confidence value at
       each leaf node as the score.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING  53
An example

 We want to send promotion materials to potential
   customers to sell a watch.

 Each package cost $0.50 to send (material and postage).

 If a watch is sold, we make $5 profit.

 Suppose we have a large amount of past data for
   building a predictive/classification model. We also have
   a large list of potential customers.

 How many packages should we send and whom should
   we send to?

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING  54
An example

 Assume that the test set has 10000 instances.
  Out of them, 500 are positive cases.

 After the classifier is built, we score each test instance.
  We then rank the test set and divide the ranked test set
  into 10 bins.

    · Each bin has 1000 test instances.

    · Bin 1 has 210 actual positive instances

    · Bin 2 has 120 actual positive instances

    · Bin 3 has 60 actual positive instances

    ·...

    · Bin 10 has 5 actual positive instances

            I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                           55
Lift curve

Bin | 1                            2       3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

                 210              120         60  40  22                   18  12         7         6        5
                42%              24%       12%                                               1.20%        1%
                42%              66%       78%    8% 4.40%    3.60% 2.40% 1.40%                        100%
                                                                                               99%
                                                  86% 90.40%  94% 96.40% 97.80%

Percent of total positive cases  100                                                         lift
                                  90                                                         random
                                  80
                                  70       10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
                                  60
                                  50                            Percent of testing cases
                                  40
                                  30
                                  20
                                  10
                                    0
                                        0

                                                  I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                              56
The ROC-curve

(Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve)

A receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve:

 commonly used to evaluate classification results on the positive class in two-
    class classification problems.

~ a plot of the true positive rate (TPR) against the false positive rate (FPR)

·   =               (the fraction of actual positive cases that are correctly classified)
       +

   ~ TPR is essentially the recall of the positive class; it is also called sensitivity

·   =               (the fraction of actual negative cases classified to positive class)

                 +

·   =               (true negative rate ~ the recall of the negative class)

                 +

   ~ another useful measure, sometimes called specificity ,

 FPR = 1 - specificity

                        I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                                          57
An example:

ROC curves for two classifiers (C 1 and C 2 ) on the same data

     C1   each ROC-curve starts from (0, 0)
C2          and ends at (1, 1).

             · (0, 0) represents the situation
                 where every test case is classified
                 as negative,

             · (1, 1) represents the situation
                 where every test case is classified
                 as positive.

          the main diagonal line represents
            random guessing, i.e., predicting
            each case to be positive with a
            fixed probability.

             · in this case, TPR has the same
                 value like FPT for each of the
                 values, i.e., TPR = FPT.

         I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                                58
An example:

ROC curves for two classifiers (C 1 and C 2 ) on the same data

Question:                                    C1
                                        C2
Which classifier is better ­ C1 or C2?

Answer:

 when FPR is less than 0.43, C1 is
    better,

 when FPR is greater than 0.43,
    C2 is better

X overall, the area under the ROC curve ( AUC ) can be used:

      · if the AUC value for a classifier Ci is greater than that of another
          classifier Cj , it is said that Ci is better than Cj.

      · if a classifier is perfect, its AUC value is 1.

      · if a classifier makes all random guesses, its AUC value is 0.5.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                                                       59
How to draw a ROC curve?

(given the classification as a ranking of test cases)

1. Obtain the ranking through sorting the test cases in a
   decreasing order of the classifier's output values (e.g.,
   posterior probabilities).

2. Partition the rank list into two subsets at every test case and
   regard every test case in the upper part (with higher classifier
   output value) as a positive case and every test case in the
   lower part as a negative case.

3. For each such partition, compute a pair of TPR and FPR values.

    a. when the upper part is empty, we obtain the point (0, 0) on ROC
    b. when the lower part is empty, we obtain the point (1, 1).

4. Finally, connect the adjacent points.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING  60
Example:

computations for drawing the ROC curve

  We have 10 test cases.
  A classifier has been built, and it has ranked the 10 test cases

    as shown in the second row of the Table below

      · the numbers in row 1 are the rank positions, with 1 being the
          highest rank and 10 the lowest.

      · The second row shows the actual class of each test case.

             "+" means that the test case is from the positive class,
             "­" means that it is from the negative class.

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING  61
Example:

computations for drawing the ROC curve

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING                 62
Data Mining

ADVANCED DATA PRE-PROCESSING

BY: IVETA MRÁZOVÁ
Data pre-processing

  Of key importance for the success of the application
  Difficult and time-consuming
  Collaboration with a domain expert is of an advantage

The goal of pre-processing:

  Select (or create) from the available data those ones relevant
   for the data mining task at hand

  Represent this data in a form suitable for processing by the
   chosen algorithm

  Final state ~ (one) data table containing the attribute
                     values of the objects

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ  64
Structured data

Temporal data

 · e.g., time series of stock prices
 · A typical task ~ predict future values
 · Example: a time series after transformation

INPUTS                         OUTPUTS

y(t0), y(t1), y(t2), y(t3)     y(t4)
y(t1), y(t2), y(t3), y(t4)     y(t5)
y(t2), y(t3), y(t4), y(t5)     y(t6)
..........

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                   65
Structured data (2)

Spatial data

· e.g., geographic information systems
· an implicit neighborhood relationship

     Attribute values of ,,adjacent" objects will not differ too much
       one from the other

· Useful especially for interpretation

Structural data

· e.g., chemical compounds
· Notation, e.g., by means of the so-called SMILES

   strings or using files of facts in Prolog
· e.g., classification of chemicals into classes based on

   their structure

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                          66
Data with too many objects

Problematic processing in batch regimen!

    use only a sample set of objects selected from the data
    use such a way to store the data that would enable to

      access all the objects without the necessity to save them to
      the operating memory
    build more models based on the subsets of objects and
      combine the models afterwards

representativeness of the selected data

    the selected objects should capture the nature of the data
      as best as possible (concerning, e.g., the correspondence
      of the attribute value distribution both on the selected
      sample set and the entire data)

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ  72
Data with too many objects (2)

   unbalanced classes in the original data
      ( tendency to prefer the majority class)

    different weights for different types of misclassification
    select examples from different classes with a different

      probability

 Cross -Validation

    From the data, we select just its certain part for training
      and another (different) part for testing

 more efficient data storage and processing
    (parallelism)

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ   73
I. MRÁZOVÁ: DATA MINING  74
Data with too many attributes

 reduce the number of attributes with an expert

 automatic reduction of the number of the attributes

   · through transformation ~ from the existing attributes
       create less new attributes (e.g., PCA analysis, ...)

         new attributes are formed as a linear combination of original
            attributes

         the necessity to provide the values of all original attributes

         new attributes might lack a clear interpretation

   · through selection ~ from the existing attributes choose
       only the most important ones (Feature Selection)

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ  75
Selection

 we are looking for those attributes, that best contribute to a
   proper classification of objects

   · Filter methods ~ to each of the attributes, compute a
       characteristics that reflects its contribution to classification

   · Wrapper methods ~ use a machine learning algorithm to
       build a model using a subset of the attributes and evaluate
       the model. Then, use the best of the built models (with the
       selected attributes).

          ,,bottom-up" ~ begin from the models built for individual
            attributes and add other attributes subsequently

          ,,top-down" ~ start with the model built for the complete set of
            attributes and remove the unnecessary ones subsequently

           I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ  76
Automatic feature selection by a filter method

 criteria based on contingency tables

  C(v1) C(v2)  C(vS) 

A(v1) a11 a12                     a1S                 r1  A input attribute
                                                          C target attribute
A(v2) a21 a22                     a2S                 r2
                                                          akl frequency of
                                                              combination
                                                              (A(vk)C(vl))
A(vR) aR1 aR2                     aRS                 rR

               s1  s2             sS                  n

          S                  R                  RS

 rk = akl           sl = akl           n =   akl
         l =1               k =1               k =1 l =1

                       I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ      77
Automatic feature selection by a filter method (2)

 Probability estimation:

P(A(vk  )   C(vl   ))  =  akl
                          n

P(A(vk  ))  =  rk            P(C(vl           ))  =  sl
               n                                     n
 criteria for attribute selection

· 2 (the higher the value, the better)

             RS           2      R                S      ak  l  -  rk sl  2
                                                                    n     
  ( )   2 =                                                               
            k =1 l =1
            akl - ekl        =n                                 rk sl
               ekl
                                 k =1 l =1

                                                                n

               I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                 78
Automatic feature selection by a filter method (3)

 criteria to select the attributes

   · entropy H ( A ) (the smaller the value, the better)

          
          
   =          

      =1                       

            where     = -                    log2  
                                                   
                              =1

            I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ            79
Automatic feature selection by a filter method (4)

criteria to select the attributes (continued)

· information measure of dependence ID(A,C) (the bigger

the value, the better)                                   MI ( A, C )               MI ( A, C )
                                                          H (C)
                                       ID (A,C) =                           =       S   sl log sl

                                                                                   -
                                                                                   l=1 n        n

· where mutual information MI(A,C):

                             RS        P(A(vk ) C(vl ))               log2  P(A(vk ) C(vl ))
                                                                            P(A(vk )) P(C(vl ))
MI(A,C) =  
                            k =1 l =1

   R S                                            akl                 1R S
                                                                      n k =1 l =1
=                                      akl  log2    n      =                       akl  log2  nakl
                                       n          rk sl                                       rk sl
     k =1 l =1

                                                  nn

                                       I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                 80
Automatic feature selection by a filter method (5)

  the attributes can be ordered according to the considered criteria
    values and then, a certain number of the best attributes is selected

     · approach ,,bottom-up" (~ add attributes)
     · approach ,,top-down" (~ remove attributes)

  each attribute is evaluated separately

  mutual influence of several attributes on the accuracy of the
    classification is difficult to be captured

     · compute the value of the criterion for a set of attributes
         (~ for all combinations of these attributes)

             selection ,,bottom-up" (~ adding of attributes ­ direct selection)
             proceed ,,top-down" (~ elimination of attributes ­ backward selection)

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ  81
Numeric attributes

Discretization of numeric attributes (~ division to intervals)

  discretization to a preset number of equidistant intervals (~ the range
    of the attribute values will be divided into intervals of the same length)

  discretization by using the information on class membership of the
    objects

  the methods differ in:
      · the strategy adopted to create the intervals (a top-down division of the
          intervals, or a bottom-up joining of the intervals, resp.)

      · the number of the obtained intervals

      · the type of the intervals

      · the criterion used to express the quality of the intervals (minimum
          classification error, entropy, 2-test)

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ  82
Fuzzy discretization

 the boundaries of fuzzy-intervals are `blurry'
   provide a relevant procedure `Interval' to find appro-
      priate input value intervals by concatenating sequ-
      ences of the input values with the same (fuzzy-)class

 fuzzy-intervals

1                      high                      (temperature)
     low          39                                  temperature

0          36 37
       33

                  I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                    97
Fuzzy discretization (2)

1         36 37       high               (temperature)
     low         39                            temperature

0 33

 to one numeric value, we can obtain two discretized
   values, such that the sum of the corresponding
   characteristic functions will be equal to 1

 arise `fuzzy'-objects with weights < 1
 the weights of `fuzzy'-objects are given by the product of the

      values of characteristic functions of all the attributes:

               =   

 possible loss of information
 contradiction ~ objects with the same values of the input

      (discretized) attributes belong to different classes

          I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                          98
Fuzzy discretization: Procedure `Interval'

3.1. if the sequence of values has the same class label, then build an
      interval of these values (with the characteristic function equal to 1
      on the entire interval)

3.2. for each interval Inti
         if interval Inti belongs to class `?'
           then if its adjacent intervals Inti ­ 1 and Inti + 1 belong to the
           same class

           3.2.1. build an interval by joining Inti ­ 1  Inti  Inti + 1
                     (with the characteristic function equal to 1 on
                     the entire interval)

           3.2.2. else join Inti ­ 1  Inti and join Inti  Inti + 1 to
                     form two fuzzy-intervals

           / continue on the next slide

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                                  99
Fuzzy discretization: Procedure `Interval' (continued)

3.2.2. else form one interval by joining Inti ­ 1  Inti such
          that the characteristic function is equal to 1 on the
          interval [Llimi ­1, Ulimi ­ 1 ] and equal to:

    +1 -   for   -1, +1
+1 - -1

and another interval by joining Inti  Inti + 1 such
that the characteristic function is equal to 1 on the
interval [ Llimi +1 , Ulimi + 1 ] and equal to:

     - -1  for   -1, +1
+1 - -1

3.3. provide a continuous coverage of the domain of the interval
      values similarly to Step 3.2.2. (the gaps between the intervals
      are understood as intervals of class `?')

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                          100
Categorical attributes

Algorithm to group the values (KEX):

     if the categorical attribute has too many values, it might
     be useful to group them together (e.g., based on the
     characteristics computed on the training data)

 Objective:
        form groups A(Grp) such that P(Class | A(Grp)) significantly
        differs from P(Class)
        + form so many groups that we have classes plus one more(´?´)

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ  101
Categorical attributes (2)

Algorithm to group the values (KEX):

The main cycle:

    1. build an ordered list of the considered attribute values
    2. for each value

            2.1. compute the frequencies of occurrence of the objects
                    with this value for the respective classes

            2.2. assign a class code to each of the values by means of
                    the procedure Assign

    3. form the intervals of the values by means of procedure Group

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ                                           102
Categorical attributes (3)

Algorithm to group the values (KEX):

Procedure Assign:
     If all the objects belong to the same class for the considered value
         1. then assign the code of this class to the value;
         2. else ­ if the object class distribution significantly differs for the considered
                value (based on the 2-test) from the apriori class distribution
                    a) Then assign the code of the most frequent class to the value
                    b) Else assign the code `?' to the value

Procedure Group:
form a group of the values that were assigned the same class code

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ  103
Missing values

 ignore objects with any of the values missing
 replace the missing value by a new value `I don´t know'
 replace the missing value by an existing attribute value

   · the most frequent value
   · proportional to the ratio of all values
   · any value

 completion of missing values by means of (a used)
  model

I. MRÁZOVÁ: DOBÝVÁNÍ ZNALOSTÍ  104
